archia_novel/scenes_canonical/intro_morning.md, before:

---
Chapter: 1
Characters:
  - "[[Aoife Blackwood|Aoife]]"
  - "[[Niamh Blackwood|Niamh]]"
  - "[[Edda]]"
Short description: test description
Next scene: 
Previous scene:
---
Aoife believed her body was perfect and sacred. Or, she tried to. It had the color, sheen, and weight of obsidian. She had to be careful where she stepped; a stray footfall could break a child's bones. But in a way that was a kind of power, power her god, the revered Kolif'rem, had intended for her. 

Her eyes held the concentrated light of the sun; no one could look into them for more than a moment without being blinded. It felt lonely sometimes. But when the loneliness crept in, Aoife had but to remind herself that it was all as Kolif'rem intended. She blazed too brightly to fall in among lesser people. She was set apart, anointed to a holier path by Kolif'rem himself. That made sense, didn't it? 

Above all though, the greatest test of Aoife's faith was her hair. Like other fyreborn, her hair blazed with hot yellow fire that would burn the hands of mortal men. *Unlike* other fyreborn, her hair wasn't just the fire itself -- it was a mess of stringy, orange, humanlike hair that seemed set ablaze with an eternal flame. It seemed determined to grow at the normal human rate, and it was a source of constant *despair*--

*Blessings*, she reminded herself. *A source of constant blessings.* She gritted her teeth, clutching an ornately carved phoenix-bone comb as if it was her only lifeline, and tried to force herself to believe the words. Detangling the mess of stringy, flaming hair was an arduous task -- no, not that. It was a *sacred ritual* that she was only too happy to perform -- and it consumed several hours of her day each morning. For reasons she hadn't quite achieved the piety to comprehend, the fire in Aoife's hair went out when she slept, and when it did the strands retracted into tight, grey curls. Every morning when she awoke, so did the flame, and her hair spooled out into a maddening bramble of intertwining orange loops. *Most* clerics of her stature had a dozen aids fluttering about with deft hands that could tame even the most unruly hair in mere minutes, wrapping it up into the intricate, intertwining braids the Escherian people were so well-known for. But most clerics of her stature didn't have hair that would scald and blacken those careful hands at the slightest touch. So she tackled her hair herself, like a common woman.

"Maybe this is Kolif'rem's way of keeping me humble," she muttered to herself as she wiped away a blazing golden tear. But even that was almost blasphemous. There were gods in Archia that valued humility and taught their clerics to consider themselves among or even below the common man, but Kolif'rem was not among their number. Kolif'rem was a god of wrath, warfare, and supremacy. Truthfully, a better cleric of Kolif'rem would order a new attendant each day to replace the charred and ruined hands of the previous one. A better cleric would pay no more mind to the screams or the smell of burning flesh than the pops and pleasant smoky smell of a log burning in a campfire. A better cleric would --

Aoife shuddered, pausing a moment to wipe the sleep and frustrated tears from her eyes before redoubling her efforts with the comb. She pulled violently at the uncooperative knots. She averted her eyes from the ash that fell away as strands plucked out by the comb burned up almost instantly. And she did *not* turn to heresy to get herself through this ordeal, no matter how uncooperative her thoughts tried to be. 

"I am holy," she whispered to herself. Her voice shuddered with something like wonder as, the tangles conquered, her fingers finally began the first of many braids.

"I am worthy. I am sacred. My eyes blaze with the wrath of my god and my head is anointed with his fire."

She paused as she finished it, standing in front of the mirror, taking in the terrible and furious and radiant sight of herself.

"I am *scared,*" she finally admitted, her voice a tiny whisper, the words barely audible above the fire that crackled in her hair. Her eyes fell to her stomach, and without thinking she reached down to cradle it gently. It was undeniable now, visible even through her clothes. She was pregnant. 

This was what she wanted. Wasn't it? She and her husband had tried for years, and at great expense. Her lip quivered.

"Mommy!" the cry rung out clear and pure, cutting through Aoife's thoughts sharply but somehow hitting her like a blunt weapon to the chest. She almost had to catch her breath.

"What is it, baby?" Aoife called out, turning to face the door of her lavish dressing room. She smiled despite itself as she saw its handle turn slightly, and then wiggle, and then turn once more before the door burst open. 

"I want *you* to do my hair!" cried Niamh, almost flinging herself at Aoife. "Edda never gets it right."

Aoife almost tripped over her robes as she stumbled to get away from her daughter. "Niamh! Niamh! How many times have I told you, it's dangerous to come around Mommy when her hair is still out!"

Niamh practically skidded to a stop in front of her. "I'm sorry, momma. But--"

Just then the beleaguered governess appeared in the doorway. "My apologies, Lady Blackwood. If you would allow me," she began, already on her way to scoop up the unruly child. 

"It's alright, Edda," Aoife said, brushing the woman's hand away gently. "I'll fix her hair this morning. I'm not needed at the cathedral until this evening, anyway."

Edda looked uncertain. "If you're quite sure, Radiant Lady Blackwood." 

She paused. Aoife didn't waver. 

"Alright. I will have the cook breakfast for the both of you. Is Lord Blackwood in this morning?"

Aoife froze. She didn't know. But Edda recovered more quickly than she did.

"Well, I'll order enough for everyone," the woman said, carefully folding any judgement behind a practiced, neutral smile. "It will be warm and in the dining hall when you both are ready."

Aoife returned her smile. "Thank you, Edda. You're dismissed."

The woman nodded, turned, and left them, shutting the door gently behind herself. Aoife waited to hear the soft sound of her retreating footsteps before pulling a thin, charred cord from her pocket and tying back the mass of her hair, not enough to walk, really, but enough to be out of reach of small, grabby hands. Then she kneeled in front of the mirror, and patted the ground in front of her, signalling Niamh to join her. The girl flounced into place without hesitation, pulling a handful of intricate spools and sprockets from her pockets as she did so and holding them up for Aoife to see.

"I want my hair in these," she proclaimed proudly.

Aoife raised an eyebrow. "*All* of them?"

"Yep!" the girl practically shouted, flashing Aoife a gap-toothed smile. 

Aoife felt a warm smile dawn on her face. "Alright," she said, "but I think Edda is going to have a fit."

"That's why I asked *you*," Niamh declared, shrugging her shoulders and leaning back into Aoife's arms. Aoife held her there a moment, tenderly and gently, like she was worried the girl might break with the slightest pressure. 

"That's... a fair point," she said softly. Then she closed her eyes, diving into a world of boundless, featureless white.

"It's safe to look now," she whispered, running her fingers through her daughter's already-combed hair. She felt Niamh bounce in front of her. 

"I want this one on the right," Niamh insisted, reaching up and pressing one of the spools into Aoife's hand. "Right here." She guided Aoife's fingers to the place she wanted it on her head.

Aoife explored the spool with her fingers. A child's spool, it was simple enough for Aoife to form a picture of it in her head. She set it on the ground in front of her and began working the hair around its place into a series of small braids. Once she was done, she picked up the spool and twisted the braids around it, clamping the small latch at its end into place over them.

"Now this one," Niamh said, pushing one of the sprockets into Aoife's palm. Again, she guided her fingers. "Here. At the back."

Aoife set down the sprocket and again her fingers sprang to work. It was quick, easy work. She wondered at it, sometimes, the ease with which her fingers wove through her daughter's hair, when her own seemed so determined to fight her. But she counted it as a blessing from Kolif'rem. As all the bodies of his followers, a gift, and this one with perfect, cooperative hair. She wove the strands into a thick braid, and twisted it into a tight, careful knot. As with every blessing from her god, Aoife tried not to dwell on it too much. Her fingers found the sprocket on the ground, and she pushed the hole at its center over the knotted braid. It was a beautiful sprocket, spellwoven in pure ruby, with teeth that curled slightly into a sharp point, giving it the shape of an ornate, Crescian sun. It had been a gift, given to her by a kind stranger when she was a girl. Aoife braided the rest of the hair that surrounded it, wrapping it around the sprocket and pushing the teeth through the braids until the ruby tips of that sun poked out through Niamh's orange hair. The effect, she knew, would be beautiful -- glinting ruby red, dancing firelike in the light from Aoife's own hair. 

"And this one," Niamh said, before Aoife had time to admire her work. She pushed one last spool into Aoife's hand. "For the left."

Aoife got to work, running her fingers through Niamh's hair, separating it into yet more braids, letting her mind wander. 

"You know, in Isseria, the men keep their hair short," she said absently. "Like to here." She tightened her fingers around a twist of Niamh's hair, holding it out only an inch from her head. 

Niamh let out a horrified gasp. "They *cut* it? Doesn't that make Kolif... Kolfi'rem angry?"

Aoife bit her lip, and went back to braiding. "Of course it does, sweetheart. But in other countries, they don't give Kolif'rem the worship he deserves. They believe he is only equal to the other six gods. They don't know he towers above them. That's why Kolif'rem blesses Escher so much, with technology and power and..." she trailed off. Had she really been about to preach to her five-year-old about Escher's *martial supremacy?* 

"And fyreborn, like you?" Niamh offered instead.

Aoife swallowed. "And fyreborn like me."

The silence that followed lasted for several minutes while Aoife's fingers worked her daughter's hair into the myriad of tiny braids the last spool required. Finally, she pressed the spool to Niamh's head and began twisting them around it.

"Was Kolif'rem angry with me?" Niamh asked, uncharacteristically sullen and serious. "Is that why I'm not fyreborn like you?"

Aoife breathed sharply, resisting the urge to open her eyes. "Of course not, Niamh," she said, making the last few twists of Niamh's braids around the spool. "You are perfect. Kolif'rem created you perfectly, as he does all people."

"But--"

"Kolif'rem designed you with a different life in mind than he designed me," Aoife said, doing her best to sound authoritative. "He designed you to take your father's place, in the House of Lords." She smiled, then. "If I sat on one of the thrones there, I'm pretty sure it would break, or catch on fire."

Niamh giggled. "I guess so," she said, uncertainly. "But... I think you're pretty."

Aoife laughed then, laughed so hard she had to force her shoulders to stop heaving before it turned into sobs. 

"What's so funny?" Niamh demanded.

"Niamh," Aoife said, picking her daughter up and setting her safely away from the mirror, where she could look at her without hurting her. Then she opened her eyes, and shielded her daughter's eyes with her hand, the closest substitute she had found for stern eye contact. "How old are you?"

Niamh laughed. "I'm five," she declared proudly. 

"And you're the prettiest five-year-old there ever was. It's true. Kolif'rem told me himself."

Niamh shrieked. "No he didn't!"

Aoife laughed, letting her hand fall to her side as she looked away from her daughter. "It's true. I swear upon the hottest fire."

Niamh laughed. "That's no good. Even the hottest fire couldn't burn you, Mommy."

Aoife grinned. "You don't know that. Where Kolif'rem sleeps, that's the hottest fire there ever was. Hot enough to melt stone."

Niamh brushed her fingers against Aoife's arm in the gesture that replaced a raised eyebrow. "Okay, Mommy," she said slowly. "I guess I have to believe you, since you're chosen by God."

"That's right."

Niamh paused a moment. 

"Okay. I'm gonna go show Miss Edda my hair!"

Aoife smiled. "Alright. You do that." She turned to watch as Niamh sprinted off, slamming open the door and leaving it slightly awry as her little footsteps pounded off into the hall. Then Aoife sighed, turned to face the mirror once more, and reached back to release her own hair from the cord that tied it away. Her fingers got back to work at her braids as she tried, unsuccessfully, to keep an empty mind.

Commit message:

added description for first scene

archia_novel/scenes_canonical/intro_morning.md, after:

---
Chapter: 1
Characters:
  - "[[Aoife Blackwood|Aoife]]"
  - "[[Niamh Blackwood|Niamh]]"
  - "[[Edda]]"
Short description: "Introduction: Aoife's morning routine, managing her own hair as well as her daughters. This scene reveals that Aoife is a cleric of Kolif'rem (but there are seeds of doubt), and that Aoife is pregnant (and scared about it)."
Next scene: 
Previous scene:
---
Aoife believed her body was perfect and sacred. Or, she tried to. It had the color, sheen, and weight of obsidian. She had to be careful where she stepped; a stray footfall could break a child's bones. But in a way that was a kind of power, power her god, the revered Kolif'rem, had intended for her. 

Her eyes held the concentrated light of the sun; no one could look into them for more than a moment without being blinded. It felt lonely sometimes. But when the loneliness crept in, Aoife had but to remind herself that it was all as Kolif'rem intended. She blazed too brightly to fall in among lesser people. She was set apart, anointed to a holier path by Kolif'rem himself. That made sense, didn't it? 

Above all though, the greatest test of Aoife's faith was her hair. Like other fyreborn, her hair blazed with hot yellow fire that would burn the hands of mortal men. *Unlike* other fyreborn, her hair wasn't just the fire itself -- it was a mess of stringy, orange, humanlike hair that seemed set ablaze with an eternal flame. It seemed determined to grow at the normal human rate, and it was a source of constant *despair*--

*Blessings*, she reminded herself. *A source of constant blessings.* She gritted her teeth, clutching an ornately carved phoenix-bone comb as if it was her only lifeline, and tried to force herself to believe the words. Detangling the mess of stringy, flaming hair was an arduous task -- no, not that. It was a *sacred ritual* that she was only too happy to perform -- and it consumed several hours of her day each morning. For reasons she hadn't quite achieved the piety to comprehend, the fire in Aoife's hair went out when she slept, and when it did the strands retracted into tight, grey curls. Every morning when she awoke, so did the flame, and her hair spooled out into a maddening bramble of intertwining orange loops. *Most* clerics of her stature had a dozen aids fluttering about with deft hands that could tame even the most unruly hair in mere minutes, wrapping it up into the intricate, intertwining braids the Escherian people were so well-known for. But most clerics of her stature didn't have hair that would scald and blacken those careful hands at the slightest touch. So she tackled her hair herself, like a common woman.

"Maybe this is Kolif'rem's way of keeping me humble," she muttered to herself as she wiped away a blazing golden tear. But even that was almost blasphemous. There were gods in Archia that valued humility and taught their clerics to consider themselves among or even below the common man, but Kolif'rem was not among their number. Kolif'rem was a god of wrath, warfare, and supremacy. Truthfully, a better cleric of Kolif'rem would order a new attendant each day to replace the charred and ruined hands of the previous one. A better cleric would pay no more mind to the screams or the smell of burning flesh than the pops and pleasant smoky smell of a log burning in a campfire. A better cleric would --

Aoife shuddered, pausing a moment to wipe the sleep and frustrated tears from her eyes before redoubling her efforts with the comb. She pulled violently at the uncooperative knots. She averted her eyes from the ash that fell away as strands plucked out by the comb burned up almost instantly. And she did *not* turn to heresy to get herself through this ordeal, no matter how uncooperative her thoughts tried to be. 

"I am holy," she whispered to herself. Her voice shuddered with something like wonder as, the tangles conquered, her fingers finally began the first of many braids.

"I am worthy. I am sacred. My eyes blaze with the wrath of my god and my head is anointed with his fire."

She paused as she finished it, standing in front of the mirror, taking in the terrible and furious and radiant sight of herself.

"I am *scared,*" she finally admitted, her voice a tiny whisper, the words barely audible above the fire that crackled in her hair. Her eyes fell to her stomach, and without thinking she reached down to cradle it gently. It was undeniable now, visible even through her clothes. She was pregnant. 

This was what she wanted. Wasn't it? She and her husband had tried for years, and at great expense. Her lip quivered.

"Mommy!" the cry rung out clear and pure, cutting through Aoife's thoughts sharply but somehow hitting her like a blunt weapon to the chest. She almost had to catch her breath.

"What is it, baby?" Aoife called out, turning to face the door of her lavish dressing room. She smiled despite itself as she saw its handle turn slightly, and then wiggle, and then turn once more before the door burst open. 

"I want *you* to do my hair!" cried Niamh, almost flinging herself at Aoife. "Edda never gets it right."

Aoife almost tripped over her robes as she stumbled to get away from her daughter. "Niamh! Niamh! How many times have I told you, it's dangerous to come around Mommy when her hair is still out!"

Niamh practically skidded to a stop in front of her. "I'm sorry, momma. But--"

Just then the beleaguered governess appeared in the doorway. "My apologies, Lady Blackwood. If you would allow me," she began, already on her way to scoop up the unruly child. 

"It's alright, Edda," Aoife said, brushing the woman's hand away gently. "I'll fix her hair this morning. I'm not needed at the cathedral until this evening, anyway."

Edda looked uncertain. "If you're quite sure, Radiant Lady Blackwood." 

She paused. Aoife didn't waver. 

"Alright. I will have the cook breakfast for the both of you. Is Lord Blackwood in this morning?"

Aoife froze. She didn't know. But Edda recovered more quickly than she did.

"Well, I'll order enough for everyone," the woman said, carefully folding any judgement behind a practiced, neutral smile. "It will be warm and in the dining hall when you both are ready."

Aoife returned her smile. "Thank you, Edda. You're dismissed."

The woman nodded, turned, and left them, shutting the door gently behind herself. Aoife waited to hear the soft sound of her retreating footsteps before pulling a thin, charred cord from her pocket and tying back the mass of her hair, not enough to walk, really, but enough to be out of reach of small, grabby hands. Then she kneeled in front of the mirror, and patted the ground in front of her, signalling Niamh to join her. The girl flounced into place without hesitation, pulling a handful of intricate spools and sprockets from her pockets as she did so and holding them up for Aoife to see.

"I want my hair in these," she proclaimed proudly.

Aoife raised an eyebrow. "*All* of them?"

"Yep!" the girl practically shouted, flashing Aoife a gap-toothed smile. 

Aoife felt a warm smile dawn on her face. "Alright," she said, "but I think Edda is going to have a fit."

"That's why I asked *you*," Niamh declared, shrugging her shoulders and leaning back into Aoife's arms. Aoife held her there a moment, tenderly and gently, like she was worried the girl might break with the slightest pressure. 

"That's... a fair point," she said softly. Then she closed her eyes, diving into a world of boundless, featureless white.

"It's safe to look now," she whispered, running her fingers through her daughter's already-combed hair. She felt Niamh bounce in front of her. 

"I want this one on the right," Niamh insisted, reaching up and pressing one of the spools into Aoife's hand. "Right here." She guided Aoife's fingers to the place she wanted it on her head.

Aoife explored the spool with her fingers. A child's spool, it was simple enough for Aoife to form a picture of it in her head. She set it on the ground in front of her and began working the hair around its place into a series of small braids. Once she was done, she picked up the spool and twisted the braids around it, clamping the small latch at its end into place over them.

"Now this one," Niamh said, pushing one of the sprockets into Aoife's palm. Again, she guided her fingers. "Here. At the back."

Aoife set down the sprocket and again her fingers sprang to work. It was quick, easy work. She wondered at it, sometimes, the ease with which her fingers wove through her daughter's hair, when her own seemed so determined to fight her. But she counted it as a blessing from Kolif'rem. As all the bodies of his followers, a gift, and this one with perfect, cooperative hair. She wove the strands into a thick braid, and twisted it into a tight, careful knot. As with every blessing from her god, Aoife tried not to dwell on it too much. Her fingers found the sprocket on the ground, and she pushed the hole at its center over the knotted braid. It was a beautiful sprocket, spellwoven in pure ruby, with teeth that curled slightly into a sharp point, giving it the shape of an ornate, Crescian sun. It had been a gift, given to her by a kind stranger when she was a girl. Aoife braided the rest of the hair that surrounded it, wrapping it around the sprocket and pushing the teeth through the braids until the ruby tips of that sun poked out through Niamh's orange hair. The effect, she knew, would be beautiful -- glinting ruby red, dancing firelike in the light from Aoife's own hair. 

"And this one," Niamh said, before Aoife had time to admire her work. She pushed one last spool into Aoife's hand. "For the left."

Aoife got to work, running her fingers through Niamh's hair, separating it into yet more braids, letting her mind wander. 

"You know, in Isseria, the men keep their hair short," she said absently. "Like to here." She tightened her fingers around a twist of Niamh's hair, holding it out only an inch from her head. 

Niamh let out a horrified gasp. "They *cut* it? Doesn't that make Kolif... Kolfi'rem angry?"

Aoife bit her lip, and went back to braiding. "Of course it does, sweetheart. But in other countries, they don't give Kolif'rem the worship he deserves. They believe he is only equal to the other six gods. They don't know he towers above them. That's why Kolif'rem blesses Escher so much, with technology and power and..." she trailed off. Had she really been about to preach to her five-year-old about Escher's *martial supremacy?* 

"And fyreborn, like you?" Niamh offered instead.

Aoife swallowed. "And fyreborn like me."

The silence that followed lasted for several minutes while Aoife's fingers worked her daughter's hair into the myriad of tiny braids the last spool required. Finally, she pressed the spool to Niamh's head and began twisting them around it.

"Was Kolif'rem angry with me?" Niamh asked, uncharacteristically sullen and serious. "Is that why I'm not fyreborn like you?"

Aoife breathed sharply, resisting the urge to open her eyes. "Of course not, Niamh," she said, making the last few twists of Niamh's braids around the spool. "You are perfect. Kolif'rem created you perfectly, as he does all people."

"But--"

"Kolif'rem designed you with a different life in mind than he designed me," Aoife said, doing her best to sound authoritative. "He designed you to take your father's place, in the House of Lords." She smiled, then. "If I sat on one of the thrones there, I'm pretty sure it would break, or catch on fire."

Niamh giggled. "I guess so," she said, uncertainly. "But... I think you're pretty."

Aoife laughed then, laughed so hard she had to force her shoulders to stop heaving before it turned into sobs. 

"What's so funny?" Niamh demanded.

"Niamh," Aoife said, picking her daughter up and setting her safely away from the mirror, where she could look at her without hurting her. Then she opened her eyes, and shielded her daughter's eyes with her hand, the closest substitute she had found for stern eye contact. "How old are you?"

Niamh laughed. "I'm five," she declared proudly. 

"And you're the prettiest five-year-old there ever was. It's true. Kolif'rem told me himself."

Niamh shrieked. "No he didn't!"

Aoife laughed, letting her hand fall to her side as she looked away from her daughter. "It's true. I swear upon the hottest fire."

Niamh laughed. "That's no good. Even the hottest fire couldn't burn you, Mommy."

Aoife grinned. "You don't know that. Where Kolif'rem sleeps, that's the hottest fire there ever was. Hot enough to melt stone."

Niamh brushed her fingers against Aoife's arm in the gesture that replaced a raised eyebrow. "Okay, Mommy," she said slowly. "I guess I have to believe you, since you're chosen by God."

"That's right."

Niamh paused a moment. 

"Okay. I'm gonna go show Miss Edda my hair!"

Aoife smiled. "Alright. You do that." She turned to watch as Niamh sprinted off, slamming open the door and leaving it slightly awry as her little footsteps pounded off into the hall. Then Aoife sighed, turned to face the mirror once more, and reached back to release her own hair from the cord that tied it away. Her fingers got back to work at her braids as she tried, unsuccessfully, to keep an empty mind.
